HOST: This brings us to the next session…
This next session is about creating
beautiful knowledge-oriented websites
using a tool called VitePress.
I think our speakers are ready.
Let us welcome Thai to the stage.
THAI: Ok.
THAI: I’m excited, I’ve never been
on this stage at Siam Paragon.
Anyways, let’s start!
Hello everyone, my name is Thai.
I’m a software engineer at Eventpop.
In this short session,
I will introduce you a tool.
When I build web applications,
I often use different frameworks,
such as, Remix, Astro or Next.js.
The choice of framework
depends on various factors.
But when I build a website that is
more content-oriented,
no matter the subject,
VitePress would be my first pick.
Let me explain: most technologies,
languages, and frameworks each have
their own “static site generator,” a tool
designed for making documentation
or knowledge-based websites.
In the React world, there’s
Docusaurus and Nextra.
In Astro, there’s Starlight.
And if you use other languages
(e.g. Go, Python, Rust),
each language will have its own tool,
and they produce websites
that look differently.
But for today,
I will talk about VitePress,
which is a static site generator
that is based on Vue.js.
I want to share this because I have tried
using many static site generators,
and I think VitePress
is currently my favorite,
I say this both as a web developer,
and as a user who consumes contents.
Currently, I am maintaining 4 websites
that are all built with VitePress.
wonderful.software, a Thai website
about software engineering.
Fresh App Factory, an open source project.
showdown.space hosts
recreational tech contests.
When we announce a new event
or share the results of past events,
they will be posted on this website.
And mjth.live, an online community
where people play music together
using a software called Jamulus.
These site are all built with VitePress.
Let’s look at websites that
others have created.
Rollup.js, Elysia.js, D3.js, Hono —
These projects have nothing to do
with Vue.js, yet they use VitePress.
What makes me like VitePress so much
is its default theme.
Although these sites looks similar,
every website can be customized
to have its own identity.
Let’s first look at VitePress
from a user’s POV.
In sites built with VitePress,
at the top left is a search bar.
Cmd+K activates it.
It doesn’t matter where you are, you can
press Cmd+K to go to the page you want.
It also shows the preview of the page
in the search results.
The sidebar is on the left side.
And on the right, is the outline
that shows what is in this page.
Its layout is pretty user-friendly.
At the top, you can see
the navigation bar
in which some items
can have its own menu.
And I think VitePress’s default theme
has a lot of attention to detail.
Here, the popup menu is divided
into two subsections.
And if the menu is too long,
it is scrollable.
(In some themes that don’t have
this much attention to detail,
when a menu is too long, it might
overflow and become unusable.)
At the top right corner,
you will see social icons.
And at the end of the page, there are
links to the next and previous pages.
It’s very easy to use.
In the website contents,
you can add callouts and alerts,
such as tips and warnings.
You can hide some contents in a details
block, which can be expanded,
so our webpage isn’t too long.
We can also use group
code blocks into tabs.
We can highlight some lines
to make them more prominent,
or blur some lines that are irrelevant.
These features are built into VitePress.
It’s really comprehensive.
And I think VitePress sites is one of the
best in class at responsive design.
Let’s look at the example.
I will show you.
This is showdown.space.
On desktop, you see all the components.
Now I will make the viewport smaller.
The social icons are now
hidden inside this ellipsis.
And the outlines on the right
is now shown here instead.
If we make it smaller,
the left menu becomes a drawer,
and the outline button moves to the right,
making more efficient use
of screen real estate.
And if we make it smaller,
the search bar becomes a
button at the top right,
and the nav bar becomes a hamburger menu.
And it’s like, look at the animation.
Lots of care put into it.
Let’s go back to the slide.
So, I think VitePress is great for users,
While sites built with VitePress kinda
look similar to each other,
it brings familiarity — I feel right
at home whever I use a VitePress site.
So if a project uses VitePress
for its docs, I feel very happy.
Because I know that if I have to read its
docs, I know how to navigate it very well.
Now, let’s look at it from
a developer’s POV.
It’s easy to get started,
whether you have an existing project
and want to add documentation to it,
or you’re starting a new web project.
Just use these two commands.
When you run the commands,
it’ll create various files.
Content goes in a folder called “docs”.
and the config files go into the
“.vitepress” folder inside “docs”.
This is so that the files related
to docs don’t clutter your project.
I think this is very well-designed.
The default theme is very extensible.
Some tools I used in the past come
with themes that are hard to extend.
I’d have to fork the theme
if I wanted to modify it,
and keep it up-to-date with the upstream.
This sometimes lead to merge conflicts.
But VitePress’s default theme
allows for easy customization.
So, for this session,
I’ll skip setting up VitePress.
You can read the docs for that.
But in this session,
Instead, I’ll show you some websites
I’ve made using VitePress
and the techniques I used.
Let’s start simple: Color theme
Every site has its own visual identity,
its own color scheme, right?
In VitePress, you can customize
the site’s color palette.
There are two main steps.
First, choose a base theme,
either a light or a dark one,
and set it in the config file.
Second, tweak individual colors.
Both light and dark themes
use CSS variables to style colors,
You can customize any color
in the color palette.
Pretty straightforward.
Next up: Custom components
(or interactive components)
In this example (MJTH.live),
this statistics page shows a chart.
Here, on wonderful.software,
some pages have a small image on the left,
with an explanation on the right.
Other pages have JavaScript console
examples, with user input and output,
as well as interactive exercises
right on the web page.
You type in an answer,
and it checks it right there.
For these, I used a VitePress feature
called “Vue in Markdown”.
Let’s look at some examples.
For instance, this component
is called “MonthlyTable”
(bad name, I know, I wasn’t
thinking clearly when I named it).
Let’s take a look at the code.
This file, index.md,
is a regular Markdown file.
Inside it, you’ll find regular
Markdown code like this,
which creates a heading using ##.
In VitePress Markdown files,
we can use ,
which is Vue.js syntax.
We can also import JSON files
and Vue components (.vue files)
and use them in our Markdown.
This gives us a result like this.
Or take this exercise, for example.
As before, import the component
and use them in Markdown.
But this time, we send data from
$frontmatter into the component.
The front matter can be written
in YAML inside the Markdown file.
This lets you send objects,
arrays, or other structured data
to the component in the Markdown file.
This keeps the component’s code
more readable.
Alternatively, you can write JavaScript
in the  block
and use that in the component.
Some may wonder what this site is.
It’s like an online lesson or something?
Let me announce it here — I’m working on
a beginner JavaScript course!
I’ve wanted to create an online
lesson since I registered
the wonderful.software domain
back in 2015,
But I never got around to it.
Then, late last year, I finally started.
I want this site to introduce people
to the world of building software.
Programming gives us a kind of magic
in the realm of computers.
We can make things happen.
I’ve recently started on this journey.
You can read it for free at
wonderful.software/js.
It’s still a work in progress.
I’m also working on
a video course with Skooldio.
Skooldio helped me design
and produce the course,
as well as providing early feedback
from their learners. Also WIP.
I’ll share the news once we launch it.
Now, let’s get back to VitePress.
In the course, I’ve added a feedback form
at the end of each page,
so people can leave feedback as they go.
There’s also a comments
section at the bottom.
These features aren’t
built-in to VitePress.
If you go to wonderful.software/js,
and have any comment,
feel free to provide feedback
with these buttons.
Let’s see how I implemented
these two components.
I used a feature called
“Layout Slots”.
The default theme offers several slots,
such as “#doc-footer-before”
and “#doc-after”.
These slots allow you to insert
components into the layout.
For example, the “#doc-footer-before”
slot will appear here —
at the end of the page, but before
the next and previous links.
while “#doc-after” will appear
after these links.
The “#doc-before” slot shows up
at the top of the page.
I use it to indicate
that this webpage is still WIP.
Here’s the implementation:
We import the necessary variables.
(Check out the docs on layout slots
for more details.)
Here’s how to use layout slots:
.
I used v-if to check the frontmatter
to see if the page is a draft.
When draft is set to true,
this message appears.
As you can see, the API we’ve
got here is remarkably flexible.
The default theme provides
30 layout slots for your use.
In other words, you can insert anything
you want in 30 different places.
The last topic I’ll cover today
is typography,
I’m not much of a designer, so VitePress’s
default theme was a big help to me.
It comes with sensible defaults
that make text easy to read,
And I simply changed the font
and font size to my liking.
This was just a matter of adding CSS.
There’s one more advanced feature
that I used that’s particularly useful
for creating content in Thai.
It’s about spacing.
If you’ve read documentation
related to Thai language,
you might find that there are
two types of spaces in Thai:
small space and big space.
This website contains a lot of
Thai and English text mixed together,
and moreover, in Thai, we don’t usually
use a period at the end of sentences.
If I used small spaces to link sentences,
the text might look cluttered,
so I decided to use big spaces
to improve readability.
Also, in Thai, the “ๆ” sign is supposed
to have a space before it
according to the official rules.
In practice, though,
people tend not to use it.
Why?
Well, if we add a space here,
the browser might wrap lines
before the “ๆ” sign,
which doesn’t look very good.
I solved these issues by customizing
Markdown rendering in VitePress.
VitePress uses the “markdown-it” library
to convert Markdown to HTML,
and we can customize many
aspects of its behavior.
I created a plugin to make newlines in
Markdown render as big spaces.
For “ๆ” signs, I don’t put a space
before them in the Markdown file,
But when rendered, the “ๆ” sign will be
wrapped in a .
This makes the rendered
HTML look like this.
Finally, I added some margin
to these spans using CSS.
As you can see, this approach
allows for a lot of customization.
There’s a lot more that you can do,
but I don’t have time to cover it all.
If you’re interested, you can check
the source code of these websites;
they are open source.
In summary, I think VitePress
is a really well-designed tool.
Since it’s open source, we can look
at its code and learn the techniques used
to achieve its great quality.
I believe that studying the code of
well-designed open source software
can help us become better
software designers ourselves.
Just like artists study the works
of other great artists
to expand their horizons.
This concept isn’t new, of course.
There’s a book called “The Architecture
of Open Source Applications”
which has been around for years.
It takes insights from popular
open source software
and gives you ideas that you
can apply to your own work.
Every chapter of this book
is available for free online.
You can either read it on their website
or buy a printed copy.
That’s all I have to share with you today.
Thank you!
HOST: Thank you Thai.
If you’re interested, feel free to go
and experiment with VitePress at home.